Welcome back to the fast neutron, in todays video, we are going to introduce the concept of cross
sections, which will help us understand how we quantify the ways in which particles interact with
matter. We will start off by introducing cross sections at a conceptual level, and then use them to
build a framework for modeling radiation attenuation. From there, we will introduce quantities like
flux and fluence, and we will wrap things up with some cool plots of cross sections varying with
particle energy - which will be crucial to understand before we get into reactor theory.

Our last video discussed neutron scattering, and we talked through some of the formulas which govern
how neutrons transfer energy when they collide with nuclei. Besides scattering, there are quite a
few other interactions that neutrons and other particles can undergo, so a natural next step is to
think through radiation interactions with matter at a higher level. All of the calculations that we
did in the last video assumed up front that a scattering event had taken place, but we know for a
fact that neutrons and other forms of radiation can penetrate all kinds of materials - so particles
aren't gaurenteed to interact with nuclei in their vicinity.

Let's begin our dicussion by thinking through how we can characterize the likelihood with which an
interaction will occur. The quantity which describes this is called a cross section. Here's a little
thought experiment to get things started.

Imagine we have a beam of neutrons firing from left to right. Unencumbered, these neutrons will fly
off to infinity. Now lets put an obstacle in their way - in this case it is a sheet of material only
one atom thick, and these atoms are gaurenteed to absorb any neutrons that collide with them. How
can we go about determining the probability that a neutron from our beam is absorbed the sheet?

An intuitive way to go about this would be to take a look at the sheet head-on. Notice that the
nuclei of the atoms take up a good chunk of the sheet's area, but there are still some gaps left
over. If we imagine our neutron beam is firing neutrons at the sheet with random positions, it
stands to reason that the probability of a neutron being absorbed is equal to the fraction of the
sheet's area taken up by the nuclei.

Let's come up with a formula for this. We will represent the area of the sheet with A, and the area
of a single nuclide with little sigma. The probability of our neutron being absorbed is therefore
just the number of nuclei times little sigma divided by the area of the sheet!

To formalize how we can calculate the number of nuclei in the sheet, we can write it as the density
of atoms within the sheet (which we will write as big N with units of atoms per volume) times the
sheet's volume, which will be A times the thickness of the sheet "Delta x". Cancelling out A shows
us that the probability of absorption is equal to the atom density of the sheet material, times the
area of an individual atom in the sheet, times the thickness of the sheet. This makes sense, as we
would expect the probability of absorption to go up if the sheet was made of a more dense material,
if the atoms were larger, or if the sheet itself was thicker.

Little sigma (the area of an individual atom) is what is called the "microscopic cross section" of
our sheet's material. "Cross section" here really is an intuitive name, since we definied this
quantity as the cross-sectional area of an atom when we look at it head-on. Because we are talking
about individual atoms here, conventional units like a square centimeter would be pretty clunky - so
instead we typically use units of "barns", where one barn is equal to 10^-24 cm^2. This tiny unit of
area is a lot more convienent to use for an individual atom. The name "barn" actually comes from the
Manhattan project, where physicists opinied that Uranium was "as big as a barn" from the perspective
of neutrons.

When we multiply a material's atom density by its microscopic cross section, we get a quantity
called the macroscopic cross section which we represent with big sigma. This has units of inverse
length, and it is equal to the probability of interaction per unit length of material. If you take
the macroscopic cross section of a slab and multiply it by the slab's thickness, you get the
probability of an interaction taking place in the slab for a given particle - that's just our
formula from earlier!

Before we move on, I want to quickly mention that the values of microscopic cross sections depend on
a whole host of factors. It probably comes as pretty obvious that we will have different microscopic
cross section values for different materials (they can be made up of all sorts of different isotopes
after all), but cross section magnitudes also depend on the type of incident particle. Some
materials really like to interact with neutrons but are fairly transparent to photons and vice
versa, so that plays into things. And then the energy of the incident particle also is massively
important in determining the likelihood of interaction, along with the temperature of the material,
and the type of interaction we are interested in, and whether the material exists as a free gas or
if it is bound in a lattice and so on and so forth. So there is a lot that goes into driving the
value of little sigma. We will talk about this in more detail in just a bit, but I just wanted to
mention that up front.

Now that we have the concept of cross sections in our toolbelt, we can get on with deriving a more
general framework for radiation attenuation that will allow us to think about phenomena more
complicated that a monodirectional beam of neutrons on a one-atom-thick sheet. For instance, if we
can quantify how a stream of neutrons is absorbed by a slab of material as a function of the slab's
thickness, that would allow us to start thinking through engineering problems like designing
radiation shields.


